doc: update for NetBSD 9.1, add GUI Build Instructions (#20610)
bitcoin/bitcoin: doc/build-netbsd.md

The following dependencies are **optional**:

  Library                                            | Purpose          | Description
  ---------------------------------------------------|------------------|----------------------
  [db4](https://pkgsrc.se/databases/db4)             | Berkeley DB      | Wallet storage (only needed when wallet enabled)
  [qt5](https://pkgsrc.se/x11/qt5)                   | GUI              | GUI toolkit (only needed when GUI enabled)
  [qrencode](https://pkgsrc.se/converters/qrencode)  | QR codes in GUI  | Generating QR codes (only needed when GUI enabled)
  [zeromq](https://pkgsrc.se/net/zeromq)             | ZMQ notification | Allows generating ZMQ notifications (requires ZMQ version >= 4.0.0)
  [sqlite3](https://pkgsrc.se/databases/sqlite3)     | SQLite DB        | Wallet storage (only needed when wallet enabled)
  [python37](https://pkgsrc.se/lang/python37)        | Testing          | Python Interpreter (only needed when running the test suite)

  See [dependencies.md](dependencies.md) for a complete overview.

## Preparation

### 1. Install Required Dependencies

> Install the required dependencies the usual way you [install software on NetBSD](https://www.netbsd.org/docs/guide/en/chap-boot.html#chap-boot-pkgsrc) - either with `pkg_add` or `pkgin`. The example commands below use `pkgin` which is usually run as `root` or via `sudo`.

Reviewer: pkg_add is the default package handler...
 - I believe it is best to use the default package handler.
- when enumerating the build and installation steps - we should not assume that the user has  sudo privileges (if possible).

I believe it is best to reformat this doc with that in mind.

An option is to add pkgin to the initial command.

`
netbsd# pkg_add pkgin autoconf automake libtool pkg-config git gmake boost libevent
`

This assumes the user has sudo privileges, is clearer on the procedure - and eliminates the need to change all the pkgin commands.

Author: Thanks for testing! NetBSD's official documentation [recommends](https://www.netbsd.org/docs/guide/en/chap-boot.html#chap-boot-pkgsrc) to use `pkgin` for most binary application tasks. I didn't include it as a dependency because it isn't, the user is free to use `pkg_add` instead of `pkgin`. I also link to documentation on how to install packages on NetBSD so the user can make a choice. Do you think I should explicitly add preparation instructions on installing `pkgin`?

Author: Addressed in 1e88f35883ac34914b1a1177244ebd7ff4977ef4. Make it clear that the examples use `pkgin`, link to documentation that shows the tool is the NetBSD recommended tool for installing binary (pre-built) packages

```bash
pkgin install autoconf automake libtool pkg-config git gmake boost libevent

```

See [dependencies.md](dependencies.md) for a complete overview.

### 2. Clone Bitcoin Repo
Now that `git` and all the required dependencies are installed, let's clone the Bitcoin Core repository to a directory. All build scripts and commands will run from this directory.

> ``` bash

Reviewer: I am using a completely clean os...

```
netbsd# git clone https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin
Cloning into 'bitcoin'...
error: failed to write new configuration file /root/bitcoin/.git/config.lock
warning: unable to unlink '/root/bitcoin/.git/config.lock': Operation not permitted
fatal: could not set 'core.repositoryformatversion' to '0'
netbsd# 
```

setting a better testing environment for NetBSD...

Author: That should be an error in the system side. First, make sure you have proper read/write access to that directory from your user. I could be wrong, but it looks like you are trying to write somewhere on root from a user. Some other troubleshooting tips: try allocating more space for the netBSD partition or manually deleting the config.lock which could have been put there by another program or process.

Reviewer: Here is a docker repo for testing NetBSD9.#

https://github.com/bitcoincore-dev/core-review/tree/docker-netbsd9

Works - figured others might find it useful...

> git clone https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin.git

Reviewer: After more thinking on this - maybe there should be a note that states that the master HEAD isn't always stable.
Maybe this should be a git clone command to a release tag?

```

### 3. Install Optional Dependencies

#### Wallet Dependencies
It is not necessary to build wallet functionality to run bitcoind or the GUI. To enable legacy wallets, you must install `db4`. To enable [descriptor wallets](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/descriptors.md), `sqlite3` is required. Skip `db4` if you intend to *exclusively* use descriptor wallets

###### Legacy Wallet Support
`db4` is required to enable support for legacy wallets. Skip if you don't intend to use legacy wallets

```bash
pkgin install db4
```

###### Descriptor Wallet Support

`sqlite3` is required to enable support for descriptor wallets. Skip if you don't intend to use descriptor wallets.

> ``` bash

Reviewer: When adding code blocks - add a newline before the ticks - it is a markdown thing...
This ensures better cross platform rendering...

![Screen Shot 2020-12-13 at 11 38 28 PM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/152159/102041016-58dcf400-3d9c-11eb-8e99-3030988ed785.png)

###### Descriptor Wallet Support

`sqlite3` is required to enable support for descriptor wallets. Skip if you don't intend to use descriptor wallets.

``` bash
pkgin install sqlite3
```
---

Author: addressed in 1e88f35883ac34914b1a1177244ebd7ff4977ef4

pkgin install sqlite3
```
---

#### GUI Dependencies
###### Qt5

Bitcoin Core includes a GUI built with the cross-platform Qt Framework. To compile the GUI, we need to install `qt5`. Skip if you don't intend to use the GUI.
```bash
pkgin install qt5
```
###### qrencode

The GUI can encode addresses in a QR Code. To build in QR support for the GUI, install `qrencode`. Skip if not using the GUI or don't want QR code functionality.
```bash
pkgin install qrencode
```
---

#### Test Suite Dependencies
There is an included test suite that is useful for testing code changes when developing.
To run the test suite (recommended), you will need to have Python 3 installed:

```bash
pkgin install python37
```
---

### Building Bitcoin Core

**Important**: Use `gmake` (the non-GNU `make` will exit with an error).

### 1. Configuration

There are many ways to configure Bitcoin Core, here are a few common examples:
##### Wallet (BDB + SQlite) Support, No GUI:
This explicitly enables legacy wallet support and disables the GUI. An error will be thrown if `db4` is not installed. If `sqlite3` is installed, then descriptor wallet support will also be built.
```bash
./autogen.sh

> ./configure --with-gui=no \

Reviewer: These code blocks don't copy and paste into the CL in NetBSD...
I think it is better to just use a single line format...
```bash

./configure --with-gui=no CPPFLAGS="-I/usr/pkg/include" LDFLAGS="-L/usr/pkg/lib" --with-boost-libdir=/usr/pkg/lib MAKE=gmake

```
It doesn't look as good - but it is much easier for the user to copy and paste...

> ./configure --with-gui=no \

Reviewer: While running ./configure ...
config.log is marked as a directory...
I am not sure if this is a result of copy and pasting the multiline command into the terminal...
Or if it is a bug... going to rebuild the image from scratch and run again...

![Screen Shot 2020-12-13 at 11 58 46 PM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/152159/102042224-4d3efc80-3d9f-11eb-8c6f-22e74aa9568c.png)

# NetBSD Build Guide

> Updated for NetBSD [9.1](https://netbsd.org/releases/formal-9/NetBSD-9.1.html)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Updated for NetBSD [9.1](https://netbsd.org/releases/formal-9/NetBSD-9.1.html).
```

> **Updated for NetBSD [9.1](https://netbsd.org/releases/formal-9/NetBSD-9.1.html)**

Reviewer 2: nit, I think the bold is unneeded here and for "required" and "optional" below. In general, I'd go light on italic and bold.

This guide describes how to build bitcoind, command-line utilities, and GUI on NetBSD.

## Dependencies

The following dependencies are **required**:

 Library                                          | Purpose    | Description
 -------------------------------------------------|------------|----------------------
 [autoconf](https://pkgsrc.se/devel/autoconf)     | Build      | Automatically configure software source code
 [automake](https://pkgsrc.se/devel/automake)     | Build      | Generate makefile (requires autoconf)
 [libtool](https://pkgsrc.se/devel/libtool)       | Build      | Shared library support
 [pkg-config](https://pkgsrc.se/devel/pkg-config) | Build      | Configure compiler and linker flags
 [git](https://pkgsrc.se/devel/git)               | Clone      | Version control system
 [gmake](https://pkgsrc.se/devel/gmake)           | Compile    | Generate executables
 [boost](https://pkgsrc.se/meta-pkgs/boost)       | Utility    | Library for threading, data structures, etc

>  [libevent](https://pkgsrc.se/devel/libevent)     | Networking | OS independent asynchronous networking

Reviewer 2: missing hyphen
```suggestion
 [libevent](https://pkgsrc.se/devel/libevent)     | Networking | OS-independent asynchronous networking
```

Reviewer 3: MehdiAmurirad

The following dependencies are **optional**:

  Library                                            | Purpose          | Description
  ---------------------------------------------------|------------------|----------------------
  [db4](https://pkgsrc.se/databases/db4)             | Berkeley DB      | Wallet storage (only needed when wallet enabled)
  [qt5](https://pkgsrc.se/x11/qt5)                   | GUI              | GUI toolkit (only needed when GUI enabled)
  [qrencode](https://pkgsrc.se/converters/qrencode)  | QR codes in GUI  | Generating QR codes (only needed when GUI enabled)
  [zeromq](https://pkgsrc.se/net/zeromq)             | ZMQ notification | Allows generating ZMQ notifications (requires ZMQ version >= 4.0.0)
  [sqlite3](https://pkgsrc.se/databases/sqlite3)     | SQLite DB        | Wallet storage (only needed when wallet enabled)

>   [python37](https://pkgsrc.se/lang/python37)        | Testing          | Python Interpreter (only needed when running the test suite)

Reviewer 2: According to doc/dependencies.md, the minimum required Python version is currently 3.6; if we can get away with specifying Python 3.6 and up, that might allow this doc to stay current longer.

Reviewer 3: Good

Author: lets leave this like this for now, when the minimum supported is 3.8, we can update it. What do you think?

Should be a while before the minimum is 3.8, right?

Reviewer 2: I don't have a strong opinion.

  See [dependencies.md](dependencies.md) for a complete overview.

## Preparation

### 1. Install Required Dependencies

> Install the required dependencies the usual way you [install software on NetBSD](https://www.netbsd.org/docs/guide/en/chap-boot.html#chap-boot-pkgsrc) -- either with `pkg_add` or `pkgin`. The example commands below use `pkgin` which is the [recommended](https://www.netbsd.org/docs/guide/en/chap-boot.html#chap-boot-pkgsrc) way to install binary packages.

Reviewer 2: Two identical links is a bit noisy/confusing; would drop one the first one.

> Install the required dependencies the usual way you [install software on NetBSD](https://www.netbsd.org/docs/guide/en/chap-boot.html#chap-boot-pkgsrc) - either with `pkg_add` or `pkgin`. The example commands below use `pkgin` which is the [recommended](https://www.netbsd.org/docs/guide/en/chap-boot.html#chap-boot-pkgsrc) way to install binary packages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Install the required dependencies the usual way you [install software on NetBSD](https://www.netbsd.org/docs/guide/en/chap-boot.html#chap-boot-pkgsrc) -- either with `pkg_add` or `pkgin`. The example commands below use `pkgin` which is the [recommended](https://www.netbsd.org/docs/guide/en/chap-boot.html#chap-boot-pkgsrc) way to install binary packages.
```

> Note: `pkgin` is usually run as `root` or via `sudo`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note: `pkgin` is usually run as `root` or with `sudo`.
```

```bash
pkgin install autoconf automake libtool pkg-config git gmake boost libevent

```

### 2. Clone Bitcoin Repo

> Now that `git` and all the required dependencies are installed, let's clone the Bitcoin Core repository to a directory. All build scripts and commands will run from this directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that `git` and the required dependencies are installed, let's clone the Bitcoin Core repository to a directory. All build scripts and commands will run from this directory.
```

```bash
git clone https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin.git
```

### 3. Install Optional Dependencies

#### Wallet Dependencies

> It is not necessary to build wallet functionality to run bitcoind or the GUI. To enable legacy wallets, you must install `db4`. To enable [descriptor wallets](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/descriptors.md), `sqlite3` is required. Skip `db4` if you intend to *exclusively* use descriptor wallets

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is not necessary to build wallet functionality to run bitcoind or the GUI. To enable legacy wallets, you must install Berkeley DB, aka BDB or `db4`. To enable [descriptor wallets](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/descriptors.md), SQLite (`sqlite3`) is required. Skip `db4` if you intend to exclusively use descriptor wallets.
```

> It is not necessary to build wallet functionality to run bitcoind or the GUI. To enable legacy wallets, you must install Berkeley DB, aka BDB or `db4`. To enable [descriptor wallets](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/descriptors.md), SQLite (`sqlite3`) is required. Skip `db4` if you intend to *exclusively* use descriptor wallets.

Reviewer 2: nit, would drop the unnecessary italics on "exclusively"

###### Legacy Wallet Support

> `db4` is required to enable support for legacy wallets. Skip if you don't intend to use legacy wallets

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
BDB (`db4`) is required for legacy wallets. Skip if you don't intend to use legacy wallets.
```

```bash
pkgin install db4
```

###### Descriptor Wallet Support

> `sqlite3` is required to enable support for descriptor wallets. Skip if you don't intend to use descriptor wallets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SQLite (`sqlite3`) is required to enable support for descriptor wallets.
```

```bash
pkgin install sqlite3
```
---

#### GUI Dependencies
###### Qt5

Bitcoin Core includes a GUI built with the cross-platform Qt Framework. To compile the GUI, we need to install `qt5`. Skip if you don't intend to use the GUI.

```bash
pkgin install qt5
```
###### qrencode

> The GUI can encode addresses in a QR Code. To build in QR support for the GUI, install `qrencode`. Skip if not using the GUI or don't want QR code functionality.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The GUI can encode addresses in a QR Code. To build in QR support for the GUI, install `qrencode`. Skip if not using the GUI or don't need QR code functionality.
```

```bash
pkgin install qrencode
```
---

#### Test Suite Dependencies

There is an included test suite that is useful for testing code changes when developing.
To run the test suite (recommended), you will need to have Python 3 installed:

```bash

> pkgin install python37

Reviewer 2: See comment above about the Python version.

Author: see: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/20610#discussion_r672795788

```
---

### Building Bitcoin Core

**Important**: Use `gmake` (the non-GNU `make` will exit with an error).

### 1. Configuration

> There are many ways to configure Bitcoin Core, here are a few common examples:

Reviewer 2: semi-colon or two sentences
```suggestion
There are many ways to configure Bitcoin Core. Here are a few common examples:
```

This explicitly enables legacy wallet support and disables the GUI. An error will be thrown if `db4` is not installed. If `sqlite3` is installed, then descriptor wallet support will also be built.

```bash
./autogen.sh
./configure --with-gui=no \
    CPPFLAGS="-I/usr/pkg/include" \
    LDFLAGS="-L/usr/pkg/lib" \
    --with-boost-libdir=/usr/pkg/lib \
    MAKE=gmake
```

##### Wallet (only SQlite) and GUI Support:

This explicitly enables the GUI and disables legacy wallet support. If `qt5` is not installed, this will throw an error. If `sqlite3` is installed then descriptor wallet functionality will be built. If `sqlite3` is not installed, then wallet functionality will be disabled.

```bash
./autogen.sh
./configure --without-bdb --with-gui=yes \
    CPPFLAGS="-I/usr/pkg/include" \
    LDFLAGS="-L/usr/pkg/lib" \
    --with-boost-libdir=/usr/pkg/lib \
    MAKE=gmake
```

##### No Wallet or GUI

```bash
./autogen.sh
./configure --without-wallet --with-gui=no \
    CPPFLAGS="-I/usr/pkg/include" \
    LDFLAGS="-L/usr/pkg/lib" \
    --with-boost-libdir=/usr/pkg/lib \
    MAKE=gmake
```

### 2. Compile

Build and run the tests:

```bash
gmake # use "-j N" here for N parallel jobs

> gmake check  # Run tests if Python 3 is available

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
gmake check # Run tests if Python 3 is available
```

> gmake check # Run tests if Python 3 is available

Reviewer 2: s/Run/run/ or s/use/Use/
